.Dd November 30, 2008
.Dt RAKE(1) "" "Ruby Programmers Reference Guide"
.Os UNIX
.Sh NAME
.Nm rake
.Nd Ruby Make
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -f Ar Rakefile
.Op Fl -version
.Op Fl CGNPgnqstv
.Op Fl D Op Ar PATTERN
.Op Fl E Ar CODE
.Op Fl I Ar LIBDIR
.Op Fl R Ar RAKELIBDIR
.Op Fl T Op Ar PATTERN
.Op Fl e Ar CODE
.Op Fl p Ar CODE
.Op Fl r Ar MODULE
.Op Fl -rules
.Op Ar variable Ns = Ns Ar value
.Ar target ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Rake
is a simple
.Xr ruby 1
build program with capabilities similar to the regular
.Xr make 1
command.
.Pp
.Nm Rake
has the following features:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Rakefiles (Rake's version of Makefiles) are completely defined in standard Ruby syntax.
No XML files to edit. No quirky Makefile syntax to worry about (is that a tab or a space?).
.It
Users can specify tasks with prerequisites.
.It
Rake supports rule patterns to synthesize implicit tasks.
.It
Flexible FileLists that act like arrays but know about manipulating file names and paths.
.It
A library of prepackaged tasks to make building rakefiles easier.
.El
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "--execute-continue" -compact
.Pp
.It Fl -version
Display the program version.
.Pp
.It Fl C
.It Fl -classic-namespace
Put Task and FileTask in the top level namespace
.Pp
.It Fl D Op Ar PATTERN
.It Fl -describe Op Ar PATTERN
Describe the tasks (matching optional
.Ar PATTERN Ns
), then exit.
.Pp
.It Fl E Ar CODE
.It Fl -execute-continue Ar CODE
Execute some Ruby code, then continue with normal task processing.
.Pp
.It Fl G
.It Fl -no-system
.It Fl -nosystem
Use standard project Rakefile search paths, ignore system wide rakefiles.
.Pp
.It Fl I Ar LIBDIR
.It Fl -libdir Ar LIBDIR
Include
.Ar LIBDIR
in the search path for required modules.
.Pp
.It Fl N
.It Fl -no-search
.It Fl -nosearch
Do not search parent directories for the Rakefile.
.Pp
.It Fl P
.It Fl -prereqs
Display the tasks and dependencies, then exit.
.Pp
.It Fl R Ar RAKELIBDIR
.It Fl -rakelib Ar RAKELIBDIR
.It Fl -rakelibdir Ar RAKELIBDIR
Auto-import any .rake files in
.Ar RAKELIBDIR .
(default is
.Pa rakelib
)
.Pp
.It Fl T Op Ar PATTERN
.It Fl -tasks Op Ar PATTERN
Display the tasks (matching optional
.Ar PATTERN Ns
) with descriptions, then exit.
.Pp
.It Fl e Ar CODE
.It Fl -execute Ar CODE
Execute some Ruby code and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl f Ar FILE
.It Fl -rakefile Ar FILE
Use FILE as the rakefile.
.Pp
.It Fl h
.It Fl -help
Prints a summary of options.
.Pp
.It Fl g
.It Fl -system
Using system wide (global) rakefiles (usually
.Pa ~/.rake/*.rake
).
.Pp
.It Fl n
.It Fl -dry-run
Do a dry run without executing actions.
.Pp
.It Fl p Ar CODE
.It Fl -execute-print Ar CODE
Execute some Ruby code, print the result, then exit.
.Pp
.It Fl q
.It Fl -quiet
Do not log messages to standard output.
.Pp
.It Fl r Ar MODULE
.It Fl -require Ar MODULE
Require MODULE before executing rakefile.
.Pp
.It Fl s
.It Fl -silent
Like
.Fl -quiet ,
but also suppresses the 'in directory' announcement.
.Pp
.It Fl t
.It Fl -trace
Turn on invoke/execute tracing, enable full backtrace.
.Pp
.It Fl v
.It Fl -verbose
Log message to standard output (default).
.Pp
.It Fl -rules
Trace the rules resolution.
.Pp
.El
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ruby 1
.Xr make 1
.Pp
http://rake.rubyforge.org/
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
Bugs, features requests and other issues can be logged at
<\fBhttp://onestepback.org/redmine/projects/show/rake\fR>.
.Pp
You will need an account to before you can post issues. Register at <\fBhttp://onestepback.org/redmine/account/register\fR>.
Or you can send an email to the author.
.Sh AUTHOR
.Nm Rake
is written by
.An Jim Weirich Aq jim@weirichhouse.org
