.\"Ruby is copyrighted by Yukihiro Matsumoto <matz@netlab.jp>.
.Dd December 29, 2008
.Dt RI(1) "" "Ruby Programmers Reference Guide"
.Os UNIX
.Sh NAME
.Nm ri
.Nd Ruby API reference front end
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Ti
.Op Fl d Ar directory
.Op Fl f Ar format
.Op Fl -list-doc-dirs
.Op Fl -no-standard-docs
.Op Fl - Ns Oo Cm no- Oc Ns Bro Cm system Ns | Ns Cm site Ns | Ns Cm gems Ns | Ns Cm home Brc
.Op Fl - Ns Oo Cm no- Oc Ns Cm use-cache
.Op Fl -width Ns = Ns Ar width
.Op Ar target ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a CUI front end for the Ruby API reference.
You can search and read API reference for classes and methods with
.Nm .
.Pp
.Nm
is a part of Ruby.
.Pp
.Ar target
can be one of the following forms:
.Bl -diag -offset indent
.It Class
for classes
.It Class::method
for class methods
.It Class#method
for instance methods
.It Class.method
for both class and instance methods
.It method
for both class and instance methods
.El
.Pp
All class names may be abbreviated to their minimum unambiguous form. If a name
is ambiguous, all valid options will be listed.
.Pp
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ri Fil
ri File
ri File.new
ri zip
.Ed
.Pp
Note that shell quoting may be required for method names containing
punctuation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ri 'Array.[]'
ri compact\!
.Ed
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width "1234567890123" -compact
.Pp
.It Fl -version
Prints the version of
.Nm .
.Pp
.It Fl T
.It Fl -no-pager
Send output directly to stdout, rather than to a pager.
.Pp
.It Fl d Ar directory
.It Fl -doc-dir Ns = Ns Ar directory
List of directories from which to source documentation in addition to the standard
directories.  May be repeated.
.Pp
.It Fl f Ar FORMAT
.It Fl -fmt Ar FORMAT
.It Fl -format Ns = Ns FORMAT
Format to use when displaying output:
.Dd ansi, bs, html, plain, simple
.Pp
Use 'bs' (backspace) with most pager programs. To use ANSI, either disable the
pager or tell the pager to allow control characters.
.Pp
.It Fl i
.It Fl -interactive
This makes
.Nm
go into interactive mode.
.Pp
When
.Nm
is in interactive mode it will allow the user to disambiguate lists of
methods in case multiple methods match against a method search string.  It also
will allow the user to enter in a method name (with auto-completion, if readline
is supported) when viewing a class.
.Pp
.It Fl -list-doc-dirs
List the directories from which ri will source documentation on stdout and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl -no-standard-docs
Do not include documentation from the Ruby standard library,
.Pa site_lib ,
installed gems, or
.Pa ~/.rdoc .
.Pp
Equivalent to specifying the options
.Fl -no-system , Fl -no-site , Fl -no-gems ,
and
.Fl -no-home .
.Pp
.It Fl - Ns Oo Cm no- Oc Ns Cm system
Include documentation from Ruby's standard library.  Defaults to true.
.Pp
.It Fl - Ns Oo Cm no- Oc Ns Cm site
 Include documentation from libraries installed in site_lib. Defaults to true.
.Pp
.It Fl - Ns Oo Cm no- Oc Ns Cm gems
Include documentation from RubyGems. Defaults to true.
.Pp
.It Fl - Ns Oo Cm no- Oc Ns Cm home
Include documentation stored in ~/.rdoc.  Defaults to true.
.Pp
.It Fl - Ns Oo Cm no- Oc Ns Cm use-cache
Whether or not to use
.Nm Ns
.Ns 's cache. True by default.
.Pp
.It Fl w Ar width
.It Fl -width Ns = Ns Ar width
Set the width of the output.
.Pp
.El
.Pp
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "USERPROFILE" -compact
.Pp
.It Ev RI
Additional options.
.Pp
.It Ev PAGER
Used as the name of pager program for displaying.
.Pp
.It Ev HOME
.It Ev USERPROFILE
.It Ev HOMEPATH
Path to user's home directory.
.El
.Pp
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "USERPROFILE" -compact
.Pp
.It Pa ~/.ri
Caches recently referenced documents here.
.Pp
.It Pa ~/.rdoc
Searches user-wide documents here.
.Pp
.El
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ruby 1
.Xr rdoc 1
.Xr gem 1
.Pp
.Sh REPORTING BUGS
.Bl -bullet
.Li Security vulnerabilities should be reported via an email to
.Aq security@ruby-lang.org Ns
.Li .
Reported problems will be published after fixed.
.Pp
.Li And you can report other bugs and feature requests via the
Ruby Issue Tracking System (http://bugs.ruby-lang.org).
Do not report security vulnerabilities
via the system because it publishes the vulnerabilities immediately.
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
Written by Dave Thomas
.Aq dave@pragmaticprogrammer.com
