= Rake 0.8.7 Released

Rake version 0.8.5 introduced greatly improved support for executing
commands on Windows.  The "sh" command now has the same semantics on
Windows that it has on Unix based platforms.

Rake version 0.8.6 includes minor fixes the the RDoc generation.
Rake version 0.8.7 includes a minor fix for JRuby running on windows.

== Changes

=== New Features / Enhancements in Version 0.8.5

* Improved implementation of the Rake system command for Windows.
  (patch from James M. Lawrence/quix)

* Support for Ruby 1.9's improved system command.  (patch from James
  M. Lawrence/quix)

* Rake now includes the configured extension when invoking an
  executable (Config::CONFIG['EXEEXT])

=== Bug Fixes in Version 0.8.5

* Environment variable keys are now correctly cased (it matters in
  some implementations).

== What is Rake

Rake is a build tool similar to the make program in many ways. But
instead of cryptic make recipes, Rake uses standard Ruby code to
declare tasks and dependencies. You have the full power of a modern
scripting language built right into your build tool.

== Availability

The easiest way to get and install rake is via RubyGems ...

  gem install rake    (you may need root/admin privileges)

Otherwise, you can get it from the more traditional places:

Home Page:: http://rake.rubyforge.org/
Download::  http://rubyforge.org/project/showfiles.php?group_id=50
GitHub::    git://github.com/jimweirich/rake.git 

== Thanks

As usual, it was input from users that drove a alot of these changes. The
following people either contributed patches, made suggestions or made
otherwise helpful comments.  Thanks to ...

* Charles Nutter

-- Jim Weirich
